Good morning class.
Today we will talk about Saint Brigid of Kildare.
Saint Brigid of Kildare or Brigid of Ireland or
Mary of the Gael (Irish: Naomh Brid) is one of
Ireland's patron saints along with
Saints Patrick and Columba.
Irish hagiography makes her an early
Irish Christian nun, abbess, and founder of several
monasteries. Her feast day is 1 February, celebrated as
St Brigid's Day or Imbolc in Gaelic Ireland.
The earliest extensive life of Brigid is the
Vita Brigitae of Cogitosus and is thought to
have been written no later than 650. According to
tradition, Brigid was born at Faughart near Dundalk,
County Louth, Ireland. Because of the legendary quality
of the earliest accounts of her life, there is much debate
among many scholars and even faithful Christians as to
the authenticity of her biographies. According to her
biographers her parents were Dubhthach, a pagan chieftain
of Leinster, and Brocca, a Christian Pict and slave who
had been baptised by Saint Patrick. Some accounts
of her life suggest that Brigid's father was in fact
from Lusitania, kidnapped by Irish pirates and brought
to Ireland to work as a slave, in much the same way
as Saint Patrick. Many stories also detail Brigid's and
her mother's statuses as pieces of property belonging
to Dubhthach, and the resulting impact on important parts
of Brigid's life story.
Differing biographies written by different authors,
give conflicting accounts of her life, however
three of those biographies agreed that she had
a slave mother in the court of her father,
Dubhthach, a king of Leinster. An ancient account
of her life is by Saint Broccan Cloen:
"Ni bu Sanct Brigid suanach
Ni bu huarach im sheirc De,
Sech ni chiuir ni cossena
Ind noeb dibad bethath che."
which translates to:
"Saint Brigid was not given to sleep,
Nor was she intermittent about God's love of her;
Not merely that she did not buy, she did not seek for
The wealth of this world below, the holy one."
One, the "Life of Brigid" dates from the closing years
of the eighth century, and is held in the
Dominican friary at Eichstatt in Bavaria.
It expounds the metrical life of Saint Brigid,
and versified it in Latin.
The earliest Latin "life" of Brigid was
a short vignette composed by Colman nepos Cracavist
around 800.
Although some tradition indicated that Saint Brigid
was "veiled" or received by Saint Maughold (Macaille),
at Croghan, it is far more possible that she took
her vows from Saint Mel of Ardagh, who also granted
her abbatial powers. She followed Saint Mel
into the Kingdom of Teathbha, which is
made up of sections of modern Meath, Westmeath
and Longford. This occurred about 468.
Brigid is known for being the only female bishop
of the early church. It is said that upon receiving
her vows Saint Mel was inspired by God
to make her a bishop.
Brigid's small oratory at Cill-Dara (Kildare)
became a center of religion and learning,
and developed into a cathedral city.
She founded two monastic institutions,
one for men, and the other for women,
and appointed Saint Conleth as
spiritual pastor of them.
It has been frequently stated that she
gave canonical jurisdiction to Saint Conleth,
Bishop of Kildare, but, as Archbishop Healy points out,
she simply "selected the person
to whom the Church gave this jurisdiction",
and her biographer tells us distinctly
that she chose Saint Conleth
"to govern the church along with herself".
Thus, for centuries, Kildare was ruled
by a double line of abbot-bishops
and of abbesses, the Abbess of Kildare
being regarded as superior general
of the monasteries in Ireland.
Brigid also founded a school of art, including
metal work and illumination, over which Conleth presided.
The Kildare scriptorium produced the Book of Kildare,
which elicited high praise from Giraldus Cambrensis,
but which has disappeared since the Reformation.
According to Giraldus, nothing that he
had ever seen was at all comparable to the book,
every page of which was gorgeously illuminated,
and he concludes by saying that the interlaced work
and the harmony of the colours
left the impression that "all this is the work
of angelic, and not human skill".
Brigid is at times known as "the Patroness of Ireland"
and "Queen of the South: the Mary of the Gael"
by a writer in the "Leabhar Breac".
Brigid died leaving a cathedral city and school
that became famous all over Europe.
In her honour Saint Ultan of Ardbraccan
wrote a hymn commencing:
"Christus in nostra insula
Que vocatur Hibernia
Ostensus est hominibus
Maximis mirabilibus
Que perfecit per felicem
Celestis vite virginem
Precellentem pro merito
Magno in mundi circulo."
which translates to:
"Christ was made known to men
On our island of Hibernia
by the very great miracles
which he performed
through the happy virgin of celestial life,
famous for her merits
through the whole world."
The sixth life of the saint is attributed to Coelan,
an Irish monk of the 8th century, and it derives
a peculiar importance from the fact that
it is prefaced by Saint Donatus, also an Irish monk,
who became Bishop of Fiesole in 824.
Donatus refers to previous lives by Ultan and Aileran.
When dying, Brigid was attended by Saint Ninnidh,
who was afterwards known as "Ninnidh of the Clean Hand"
because he had his right hand encased with a
metal covering to prevent it ever being defiled,
after being the medium of administering the last rites
to "Ireland's Patroness".